>> Brian Holt: Okay, so we have gotten
through static site generation,
server-side rendering, and
now we are fully into this
unknown new territory,
which is React server components.
I reflexively call them RSCs, I'm trying
to at least sprinkle in continually that
they are React server components, but
if I say RSCs, that's what I mean.
So we've talked about
client-side components,
we talked about SSG, we talked about SSR.
But now we're gonna talk about
React server components,
which are relatively new concepts.
It's probably why most of you
are interested in taking this course,
it's the most interesting
new thing about this course.
Let's just dwell a second on
this statement right here,
because I think it's surprising to
some people, it was surprising to me.
I heard about RSCs the first time,
I was at Next Conf, forever ago, and
I was like, they're redoing server
side rendering, interesting, right?
And once I got more and more into that,
I realized that they're actually
entirely different concepts.
You can do RSCs with SSR, you can do one,
you can not do the other,
you can do both, and you can do neither.
So we'd just say they don't really
have too much to do with each other.
The key is with server-side rendering,
you do the initial page load,
you send that down to the user, and
then everything gets taken over by
client-side rendering, that's SSR, right?
React server components are just
components that only ever render on
the server.
So it's actually an ongoing relationship
between the server and the app.
Whereas SSR, once it does its initial
render, it's just done, it's no longer
involved in the equation, client-side
react takes over at that point.
So SSR only speeds up that first page,
that's full stop,
that's all it does ever, or it'll ever do.
RSCs are much more opinionated, much more
integrated with your server, it's why you
need something like Next.js because it
just won't work on a Fastify server.
Despite the fact that we're actually going
to make it work with the Fastify server,
but we're not supposed to.
[LAUGH] So does that make sense?
They're different, so you can have
server-side rendering where you output
everything for that first page render.
And then you can have RSCs after
that where you have an ongoing
relationship between your app both
on the server and on the client.
Or you cannot, you can just say,
here's the first page load
client-side react to take over, or
you can not do server-side rendering and
then you can have RSCs after that fact.
All this to say is they don't have
anything to do with each other,
from that perspective.
So an RSC it's just really this,
it's just a server component that only
renders on the server and then you're
also gonna have client components by
virtue of that only ever do
anything on the client as well.
That's really it, but the cool thing
about a React server component is,
the client actually never receives any of
the code of what happens on the server,
why is that cool?
Now you can start making SQL
queries in your React components,
because it's all on the server, right?
And I know that's a little weird,
if it doesn't feel weird you haven't
been writing React long enough.
But to do an effect essentially that
directly just queries your database should
feel a little strange but it's fine
because it's all happening on the server.
And then all that gets sent
down at the end of it,
it's not a React component at all,
it's just mark-up.
Or it's React flight protocol
we're gonna get there, but
for all intents and purposes,
it's just a condensed HTML,
is really what ends up
getting sent over the wire.
So, why did we do this, why are we here,
why are you listening to me?
These are all questions
I have no answers for.
But no matter what you do with React,
large swaths of your app are going to
be just mark-up, just stuff, right?
Stuff that doesn't have
any sort of interactivity.
Let's talk about just this body,
right, this is a React app,
there's nothing interactive about
this body component in here, right?
It's just reading from a markdown file and
displaying you a bunch of mark-up,
it's inert, right, it doesn't do anything,
it just displays, it just is.
Now, if this was a client-side React app,
which it very well could have been, right?
This would still exist in React code,
right?
It would still be wired up to
be interactive even if it could
never be interactive.
And that's what React server components
kind of like lean into that idea.
It's like, look,
most of this is never interactive,
let's just simplify that aspect of it and
just say this is just gonna be rendered
on the server and then it's just never
going to change after that, so
it has no interactivity afterwards.
Yeah, Mark.
>> Mark: A clarification from chat, so
essentially it reduces the hydration step.
>> Brian Holt: So, at best I can say
the answer is it changes the relationship
to hydration, [LAUGH] it's just different.
Or maybe stated differently,
your framework will take care of this
always, right, you will never be in
charge of this unless you're wild enough
like us to just do it yourselves.
More what is interesting is that when
you go to render a component and
it sees that it's a server component.
Normally it would just look into
the bundle, find the code for it,
run the React code and
then render out the component for you.
In our case, it's just gonna call
the server and the server's gonna say,
here's your mark-up.
So that's the relationship that's
strongly changing here is,
what happens when I render a component
after the initial page load.
And I want you to focus on
that cuz the initial page
load is less interesting here.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, I feel comfortable
with that answer, go ahead.
>> Mark: Will it reduce the amount
of JavaScript that is rand?
>> Brian Holt: Yes, so that is one of
the benefits of RSCs, is that all of these
server components don't exist
in your client bundle anymore,
all of those components
only live on the server.
It's basically just like a stub to say,
if this component gets rendered,
call the server for
what this is going to be.
As opposed to right now,
when you have a client side component,
all of the code that renders
that comes with the bundle.
So your bundle, in theory,
can shrink a lot,
cuz most of these components will
actually live on the server.
>> Brian Holt: That is actually probably
the biggest difference here that we're
concerned with.
>> Brian Holt: Good questions,
other questions?
>> Brian Holt: It's confusing, to be super
honest with you, this is confusing stuff.
And it took me a while reading blog posts,
going through it, writing examples apps,
reading their sample apps for me to
finally just have that light bulb moment.
It's like, none of this has
to do with anything, right,
it's an entirely new concept here.
>> Brian Holt: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: It definitely blends or
it blurs the line a little bit of
what happens on the server and
what happens on the client, right?
Because you're gonna be weaving in and out
of, this happens on the client, this one
happens on the server and it's gonna be
fairly seamless for you for the most part.
>> Brian Holt: What you're gonna find here
is Next.js one in with the controversial
opinion.
I think I'm okay to say that it's
a controversial opinion, that everything
is a RSC by default, and that you have
to opt into the client side components.
So it just assumes every components you're
going to write from here on Next.js is
a server component.
And that when you need
client side interactivity,
that you're gonna say this
is a client component.
Some people like that opinion, I can
certainly see the valid take of why they
would do it that way because
many components are this way.
It might even be most
components are this way,
they probably have data to tell
you one way or the other, I don't.
The reason why people find it
controversial, myself included,
is that it's just a paradigm
departure of how we write React code.
For example, you cannot use
useState in a server component,
that's client-side state and
a server component can't track
client-side state, so it's hard, right?
What you're gonna find about this,
is like this does just change that you
have to write React and it adds this
additional thread in your brain of am I
on the client, or am I on the server.
When you didn't have to have that
before and that sucks a bit, right?
It's additional cognitive
load that you have
to carry when you're writing a React app,
and that's hard.
Yeah, question.
>> Mark: Would RSCs be better or
worse when it comes to slow connections?
>> Brian Holt: Everyone's favorite answer,
it depends, [LAUGH].
It depends, there's no slam dunk here,
because on a slow connection,
if you download the entire React app, the
entire app is now on your phone, right?
And then you can just go through
everything feels nice and
zippy because everything is just
running locally on your phone.
When you have a React server component,
every time you change the components,
it's gonna make a server request, right?
So latency,
not only becomes an initial problem,
it becomes an ongoing problem, right?
But if you have these monster RSCs
that have lots of data in them and
those renders are really hard
on the device for some reason.
Let's say rendering a million line table,
right, one, why?
But two,
that happening on the server is gonna be
much better than probably happening
on an old Android device,
where the CPU just can't handle it,
so it depends.
Your time to first meaningful paint
is also gonna be quite improved, and
as you can see we're spidering out into
these all these kind of edge cases.
But let's say you have
an app that has 40 pages,
and every user, on average, uses two.
In theory, they're only get the two
components that they need to render
those things and
they're leaving out the other 38.
Likely that's a better experience for them
depending on how heavy those pages are.
>> Brian Holt: On average they use
37 of those page on every visit,
it could suck, right?
So it could go either way as well.
So, I'm sorry for not clean answer,
but it's not a clean answer, right?
Honestly, what we've gotten into is like,
is it better to have a PHP server side pre
rendered app, or is it better to have
a React app, that single page application?
That is the exact same discussion
that we're having right now.
In fact, many people have pointed out that
RSCs feel a lot like PHP, and I would
wholeheartedly endorse that notion from
actually a generally positive perspective.
It's like I have a pretty favorable
perspective of PHP from that perspective.
This leans much more into that
kind of same paradigm, and
it's the same argument that we're having.
Okay, was that a sufficiently complicated
answer to that somewhat simple question?
[LAUGH] Okay, hopefully at the end of
this, what I really want you to have is,
its complicated relationship with RSCs,
cuz that's kind
of the relationship that I have,
and I'm projecting as I do.
Okay,
>> Brian Holt: The coolest part about this
is it makes a lot of this things were
you had to make an API route and
a client-side app route together
to accomplish one task.
A good example of I have a form that
takes in 15 things from the user and
then it saves it to the database.
How would you do that right now
with a client-side React app?
Well, okay, I get my form component,
and then on submit,
I submit to an API endpoint.
The endpoint validates everything,
saves to the database,
responds back, hey, everything's okay.
With RSCs, this becomes just
incredibly simple we'll do server
actions here in just a second,
and it's all one step, right?
I have to write an API endpoint,
your React app basically takes
care of generating micro API endpoints for
you because it's all one context to it.
So that kind of code gets just
wildly simplified by RSCs,
it's actually very, very cool,
I really do enjoy that part of it.
You'll see a strong upside and a strong
downside here, if I'm doing a good job,
hopefully you will see both.
And that allows you to use things like
secrets, right, so if you have OpenAI,
if I have secrets to make requests to
their service or something like that.
I can do that directly from my
components now as opposed to on my
Fastify API endpoint.
So that kind of melding of concerns
is nice, it works out really well.
Yeah, it makes it very fluent to write
these kind of client to server workflows,
yeah, that's a good way of putting it.
Don't write RSCs by hand, it's all over
their docs, please don't do this yourself,
please rely on a framework
that does this for you,
because it's a really unstable API.
But I don't like that, I like figuring out
what everything is happening underneath
the hood, and
I think it makes me more grateful for
the abstraction, and
it makes me use the abstraction better.
So we're going to write everything down to
we're gonna write flight protocol by hand.
RSCs are meant to be
implemented by frameworks.
React like to maintain that it itself is
a library, it is not a framework, I think
that is a meaningless distinction that
it is both neither and who cares, right?
But RSCs really are meant to be
implemented by Next.js, by TanStack,
by Remix/React Router v7/ whatever
they decide to call it next week.
It's a really deep integration
into whatever you're shipping.
So right now it's node only, I think that
tracks because it has to render your React
app, but
there's some talk that they could.
It's technically possible to integrate
this into, like a Rust app or
something like that, no one is doing
it right now, but it could be done.
So right now,
your options are basically just Next.js,
it's the only one that fully
implements everything.
They make sense because about half the
React core team works at Vercel at this
point, they ship Next.js.
So, the React Router team
has expressed that they
are going to ship part of it,
but not all of it.
And then I actually spoke to last week,
and
he said at some point they'll start
doing some of it in TanStack Start.
>> Brian Holt: I don't know enough to
say what the Remix plan is for it, but
the Next plan is just what I told you,
that everything is an RSC by default.
And TanStack Start is the opposite
everything is a client side by default,
and you opt into server components.
So both valid for different reasons,
you'll have to decide
which one you like better.
>> Speaker 3: What's
the point of React Router,
v7 doing it if they already have server
client split for some actions, what's
the advantage of having RSCs versus what
they do today or they're splitting code?
>> Brian Holt: I won't speculate
too much cuz I don't really know,
the only thing I'll say about specifically
the advantage of opting into the whole RSC
thing is that it allows you to access.
Be internals of React and
ship this really compact,
almost binary like format that then
gets interpreted directly by React.
But you'd have to look further
cuz I don't know after that,
I haven't written Remix in a long time,
so that's why.
So, RSCs work today and
Next.js don't work at all in either
one of these to my knowledge.
I think there's an unstable branch of both
of these that have some RSC work in them,
but you'd have to go look, so
today, your option is Next.js.
And both of these frameworks have said
that they're not gonna support all of it,
that they only support part of it.
So we're gonna write first our NotePasser
app, which is going to be just pure Node,
it's gonna have Node Next.js, so
that you can see what it does.
And then we're gonna start writing some
Next.js, and you're gonna be very grateful
once we're into [INAUDIBLE]
everything that it does for you.
>> Brian Holt: So
the app we're gonna build is NotePasser,
remember in school when you used to
have to like rely on penmanship and
stealthiness to get your
notes to your classmates.
If you don't, you're probably Gen Alpha or
something like that, and bless you.
Back in my day, we couldn't text because
there was no such thing as texting, right?
That's not totally true, there was
texting my time was in high school, but
we're gonna build an app that kind of
approximate that experience, it'll be fun.
Yeah, one note I just
wanna throw out here,
I had originally built this with a full on
auth provider, and I realized afterwards,
I was like why am I doing this?
This teaches you nothing about React.
So I'm gonna leave it as an exercise to
you afterwards is like, go build auth on
top of this, it could be a fun kind of way
to learn more about some of these things.
But we are just going to assume that
the user is always user ID 1 and
that they're always correctly logged in.
That's why I didn't add it here,
is because it was a huge distraction to
get pretty protected routes and
stuff like that.
Yeah, and then I get left to
some ideas here Neon Auth,
this is the one that I worked on at Neon,
but like Clerk, Descope, there's a bunch
of other cool auth providers out there
that you can definitely try as well.